add tokio posts (#116)
RustMagazine/rustmagazine: content/issue-4/how-tokio-schedule-task.md

> `Future`, representing an asynchronous computation task, are the basis for implementing asynchronous in Rust. Unlike other languages, the computation does not automatically execute in the background, it needs to actively call its `poll` method. Tokio is the most widely used asynchronous runtime in the community. It uses various tips internally to ensure that `Future` are scheduled and executed fairly and timely. However, since the execution of Futures is cooperative, starvation of `Future` can inevitably occur in some scenarios.

Reviewer: Slight language fixup: (IMHO)
```suggestion
`Future`s, represent an asynchronous computation task, are the basis for implementing asynchronous Rust. Unlike other languages, the computation does not automatically execute in the background, it needs to actively call its `poll` method. Tokio is the most widely used asynchronous runtime in the community. It uses various tips internally to ensure that `Future`s are scheduled and executed fairly and timely. However, since the execution of `Future`s is cooperative, starvation of a `Future` can inevitably occur in some scenarios.
```

This article will analyze a problem I encountered while developing CeresDB to look at issues that may arise with Tokio scheduling. Please point out any inadequacies as my knowledge is limited.

# Background

> [CeresDB](https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb) is a high-performance time series database designed for cloud-native. The storage engine uses an LSM-like architecture where data is first written to memtable, and when some threshold is reached, it is flushed to the underlying storage(e.g. S3). To prevent too many small files, there is also a background thread that does compaction.

Author: I think cloud-native is used as a noun, not adj.

In production, I found a strange problem. Whenever compaction requests increased for a table, the flush time would spike even though flush and compaction run in different thread pools and have no direct relationship. Why did they affect each other?

# Analysis

> To investigate the root cause, we need to understand Tokio's task scheduling mechanism. Tokio is event-driven, users submit tasks via `spawn`, then Tokio's scheduler decides how to execute them, most of time using a multi-threaded scheduler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To investigate the root cause, we need to understand Tokio's task scheduling mechanism. Tokio is event-driven; users submit tasks via `spawn`, then Tokio's scheduler decides how to execute them, most of time using a multi-threaded scheduler.
```

Multi-threaded scheduler dispatches tasks to a fixed thread pool, each worker thread has a local run queue to save pending tasks. When starts, each worker thread will enter a loop to sequentially fetch and execute tasks in its run queue. Without a strategy, this scheduling can easily become imbalanced. Tokio uses work stealing to address this - when a worker's run queue is empty, it tries to "steal" tasks from other workers' queues to execute.

> In the above, a task is the minimum scheduling unit, corresponding to `await` in our code. Tokio can only reschedule on reaching an await, since future execution is a state machine like below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above, a task is the minimum scheduling unit, corresponding to `await` in our code. Tokio can only reschedule on reaching an await, since `Future` execution is a state machine like below:
```

```rs
async move {
  fut_one.await;
  fut_two.await;
}
```
This async block is transformed to something below when get executed:

```rs
// The `Future` type generated by our `async { ... }` block
struct AsyncFuture {
    fut_one: FutOne,
    fut_two: FutTwo,
    state: State,
}

// List of states our `async` block can be in
enum State {
    AwaitingFutOne,
    AwaitingFutTwo,
    Done,
}

impl Future for AsyncFuture {
    type Output = ();

    fn poll(mut self: Pin<&mut Self>, cx: &mut Context<'_>) -> Poll<()> {
        loop {
            match self.state {
                State::AwaitingFutOne => match self.fut_one.poll(..) {
                    Poll::Ready(()) => self.state = State::AwaitingFutTwo,
                    Poll::Pending => return Poll::Pending,
                }
                State::AwaitingFutTwo => match self.fut_two.poll(..) {
                    Poll::Ready(()) => self.state = State::Done,
                    Poll::Pending => return Poll::Pending,
                }
                State::Done => return Poll::Ready(()),
            }
        }
    }
}
```

> When we call `AsyncFuture.await`, `AsyncFuture::poll` get executed. We can see that control flow returns to the worker thread only on state transitions (Pending or Ready). If `fut_one.poll()` contains blocking API, the worker thread will be stuck on that task. Tasks on that worker's run queue are likely to not be scheduled timely despite work stealing. Let me explain this in more details:

Author: API here is a uncountable nouns, a make the sentence strange for me.

If flush and compact run in the same runtime, there is no further explanation needed. But how do they affect each other when running in different runtimes? I wrote a [minimal program](https://github.com/jiacai2050/tokio-debug) to reproduce this.

This program has two runtimes, one for IO and one for CPU scenarios. All requests should take only 50ms but actual time is longer due to blocking API used in the CPU scenario. IO has no blocking so should cost around 50ms, but some tasks, especially io-5 and io-6, cost roughly 1s:
```bash
[2023-08-06T02:58:49.679Z INFO  foo] io-5 begin
[2023-08-06T02:58:49.871Z TRACE reqwest::connect::verbose] 93ec0822 write (vectored): b"GET /io-5 HTTP/1.1\r\naccept: */*\r\nhost: 127.0.0.1:8080\r\n\r\n"
[2023-08-06T02:58:50.694Z TRACE reqwest::connect::verbose] 93ec0822 read: b"HTTP/1.1 200 OK\r\nDate: Sun, 06 Aug 2023 02:58:49 GMT\r\nContent-Length: 14\r\nContent-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8\r\n\r\nHello, \"/io-5\""
[2023-08-06T02:58:50.694Z INFO  foo] io-5 cost:1.015695346s
```

> The above log shows io-5 already took 192ms before the HTTP request, and cost 823ms from request to response, which should only be 50ms. It seems like the connection pool in reqwest have issues, with the IO thread waiting for connections held by the CPU thread, increasing IO task time. Setting `pool_max_idle_per_host` to 0 to disable connection reuse fixed the problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above log shows io-5 already took 192ms before the HTTP request, and cost 823ms from request to response, which should only be 50ms. It seems like the connection pool in `reqwest` have issues, with the IO thread waiting for connections held by the CPU thread, increasing IO task time. Setting `pool_max_idle_per_host` to 0 to disable connection reuse fixed the problem.
```

> I ask this issue [here](https://github.com/seanmonstar/reqwest/discussions/1935), but don't get any answers yet, so the root cause here is still unclear. However I gain better understand how Tokio schedule tasks, it's kinds of like Node.js, we should never block schedule thread. and in CeresDB we solve it by adding a dedicated runtime to isolate CPU and IO tasks instead of disabling the pool, see [here](https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/pull/907/files) in case of curiosity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I filed this issue [here](https://github.com/seanmonstar/reqwest/discussions/1935), but did not get any answers yet, so the root cause here is still unclear. However,I gained better understand how Tokio schedule tasks, it's kind of like Node.js; we should never block schedule thread. In CeresDB we solve it by adding a dedicated runtime to isolate CPU and IO tasks instead of disabling the pool, see [here](https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/pull/907/files) if curious.
```

Reviewer 2: Suggest:
I filed this issue [here] (https://github.com/seanmonstar/reqwest/discussions/1935) but have not as yet received any answers, so the root cause here is still unclear.  However, I gained a better understanding of how Tokio schedules tasks.  It's a bit like Node.js, we should never block the schedule thread.  If you're curious, in CeresDB we solve it by adding a dedicated runtime to isolate CPU and IO tasks instead of disabling the pool, see [here] (https://github.com/CeresDB/ceresdb/pull/907/files)

>>
I'm not sure about the ; to be honest.  In case of curiosity is also fine.  "It's kind of like" - is right but it's very chatty :)
